---
layout: post
title: "The Virtue of Failure"
tagline: "Speech to BBBS Atlanta High School Graduates"
author: Ken Cavagnolo
category : editorial
tags: []
comments: true
tweets: true
---

<div class="blurb">

Back in 2011 when I'd first moved back to Atlanta from France, I was
privileged to give a <a
href="https://www.bbbsatl.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=474:2011graduation&catid=36:press-releases&Itemid=200"
target="_blank">speech to a group of awesome kids graduating high
school.</a> Like me, they were Littles in the Big Brothers/Big Sisters
organization. I don't like speeches: they tend to be self-gratifying
and pointless. So my goal was to say something that they might find
useful with no bullshit and no buzzwords, something legitimate. Below
is the text of the speech.

<hr>

<p>Thank you for inviting me here tonight and to Lisa for the
introduction. I’m humbled to have this opportunity. I’m also honored
to be here with an audience of Littles and Bigs that at some point set
high standards for themselves and are now seeing big return on their
investment. It’s a privilege to come full-circle in this way.</p>

<p>I was, and in many ways still am, a Little. I grew-up in a
single-parent, low-income family in Lilburn. I did not speak to my
father for over 15 years, and it was mainly through the efforts of my
amazing mother, Lorna Cox, whom passed away in 2003, that I am here
today. I was a bit of a wild child: I had lots of energy, no focus, no
fear of mischief, and felt generally above the reproach of anyone
older or wiser than me. The demands of my mother’s job prevented her
from having the control over me a dual-parent family might have
had. So, she sought out a mentorship program and enrolled me in Big
Brothers/Big Sisters.</p>

<p>I had a very successful match that continues up to this day, and I
cannot concisely describe the incredible depth of my Big Jim’s
character or his impact on my life, so I will simply say that he
fundamentally changed my life for the better. He helped me focus my
energy, promoted pursuit of my passions, taught me personal and social
discipline, and inspired me to dream big. I’m confident that many of
you feel the same way about your Big -- they are indeed life changers,
the presence of so many glowing faces here tonight is testament to
that fact. But, as I experienced with Jim, your Big won’t be going
with you to the next level, the responsibility for actualizing your
dreams is now 100% yours.</p>

<p>How will you approach this task? Have you considered the mindset
needed to face down this challenge?</p>

<p>Though many young people hope and pray so, I know I did, accolades and
successes rarely occur in a moment of genius, a stroke of luck, or
instant celebrity; typically, it is the body of work over one’s
lifetime, the results of a tireless dedication to the self, and a
sense of greater responsibility to make the world a better place,
which determines their achievements. So for those of you willing to
accept the challenge, take note: during this process, failure will
visit you far more often than success. But that statement isn’t meant
to scare or discourage you, be inspired by it, because the ability to
persevere through that adversity is the road to ultimate
achievement. Being so young, I would hesitate to share these
sentiments with you so confidently were they not ones that have been
stated throughout history by people far more accomplished than me.</p>

<p>I cling to two fairly well-known quotes that inspire me on the issue
of suffering failure to find success. The first is from Winston
Churchill:</p>

<blockquote>Success is the ability to go from failure to failure
without losing your enthusiasm.</blockquote>

<p>The second is from Michael Jordan:</p>

<blockquote>I've missed more than 9000 shots in my career. I've lost
almost 300 games. Twenty-six times I've been trusted to take the game
winning shot and missed. I've failed over and over and over again in
my life. And that is why I succeed.</blockquote>

<p>Whether you realize it or not, you are already battle-hardened
veterans in the war with failure, it’s why you’re here today as
successful graduates.</p>

<p>So then, as you move forward against new challenges, what more should
you be expecting of yourself? I propose you take on the next level of
responsibility: that of never making excuses. Now realize, the lessons
you’ve learned up to now have prepared you for this task. You are
capable of accepting that there are no days off, no reasons to
reminisce about “what might have been,” that there is rarely, if ever,
any reason to distribute blame. As Shakespeare said in “The Life of
King Henry the Fifth”:</p>

<blockquote cite="http://shakespeare.mit.edu/henryv/henryv.3.1.html">
In peace, there's nothing so becomes a man<br>
As modest stillness and humility:<br>
But when the blast of war blows in our ears,<br>
Then imitate the action of the tiger;<br>
Stiffen the sinews, summon up the blood</blockquote>

<p>Accepting the blame for, and then overcoming, the times in our lives
when we fall short of expectations requires a profound toughness, one
you already possess as accomplished Littles. When confronted with
failure, “stiffen the sinews, summon up the blood,” accept
responsibility and resolve to do better. That single action is the
manifestation of personal accountability, responsibility, dedication,
and an unshakable belief in yourself. It is also one way to honor
yourself and everyone that has ever had a positive hand in crafting
your life.</p>

<p>The pay-off of this behavior is that it has an impact well beyond you:
it creates a pathway to understand, and have empathy for, others, no
matter how different you may be from them. Acknowledging and
appreciating the struggles of someone else allows you to see beyond
their surface, and this only happens after you have done it for
yourself. Acquiring this world view is what makes Big Brothers/Big
Sisters work: it’s the reason your Big’s have opened their hearts and
shared their lives with you, and it is part of the reason we are all
here tonight. We all see the best in each other, and we’ve strived to
bring that out: no matter the difficulty and no matter the setbacks.</p>

<p>So, as you advance into a future filled with only question marks, a
world in need of drastic improvement, seek out ways to better your
life and those around you so that someday you are asked in front of
this podium. And remember, failure is not a sign of weakness: it is
not an indictment of you, your character, or your goals. Failure is a
testament to your strength, to your willingness to work hard, to take
risks, and make the sacrifices needed to get to a better place in life
so that you can pay it forward. In a strange twist of fate, failure is
our greatest ally in obtaining success. I wish you all the best and am
proud to be counted among you as a former Little and current
Big. Godspeed.</p>

</div>
